# Sequence of writing
The writing of most papers in the McHenry Lab are developed in the following order:

1. **Construct a first draft of the figures.** The intent here is to envision a narrative for the project that (1) explains the methods, (2) illustrates the data analysis, and (3) demonstrates the major findings. 
2. **Compose the Methods.** Once it is clear what data need to be included to support the paper's narrative, then the methods can be written.
3. **Write the Results.** This step requires confidence in what figures and statistics that will be included in the final paper. 
4. **Draft the Introduction and Discussion.** The Discussion is usually easier to start with, because the text should flow from what is written in Results. However, as the literature is brought into the writing process, it often makes sense to draft up the Introduction as well. There is no harm in developing these sections together.
5. **Start the abstract**. It's a good idea to create the first draft of the abstract once the structure of the Intro and Discussion is apparent. This is because the abstract will need many stages of refinement. Its concise format can also be helpful for guiding the writing on those more lengthy sections.
6. **Revise, revise, revise.** It's best to assume that numerous revision cycles will be required to arrive at a publication-quality manuscript. It is common when writing one section to reveal shortcomings in other sections. So, after drafting the entire paper on the first pass, you will generally revisit all sections and the figures and not necessarily in order.

There are many tips and guidelines for the composition of each section of a paper. Here's well assume that you are writing a paper for the Journal of Experimental Biology or a journal with a comparable format.

# General tips

- **Tense**. People often get tripped up on the use of tense and you see a mixture of past and present tense in papers all the time. In my opinion,  you should describe your experimental methods and results in the past tense because they were all performed previously. However, and here is where it gets tricking, general statements of how you think the world works should generally be written in the present tense. This would hold for hypotheses (e.g., "It appears likely that prey fish sense the water flow generated by predator") and conclusive statements ("We find that fish sense the flow generated by predators"). An even trickier case arises through mathematical models. Models tend to be written in the present tense. Despite the fact that they may have been previously formulated, they are conceptual representations of how the author thinks the world works now. So, in a purely theoretical paper, it is most common to use the present tense, except perhaps when describing previous studies. Things get tricky for studies that offer a mix of experiments and theory. For this, I think it is appropriate to describe the model in the present tense and experiments in the past tense.
- **Semantics**. Biology is full of terms with multiple definitions and the physical sciences offer some helpful quantities that may be foreign to some biologists. It is therefore important to clearly define any such terms and then to use them consistently throughout the paper. 
- **Do not mix the sections**. Although you may cite papers in the Methods (when you are borrowing techniques), discussion of the literature should  be restricted to the Introduction and Discussion. The Methods section should not discuss results, the Results should not cite papers, and the Discussion should not introduce results that we not presented in Results. Authors have a surprising tendency to blur the boundaries between sections and then face pushback from reviewers.

# The Abstract

# The Introduction
The Introduction of a paper should concisely explain a major question addressed by your study and any necessary background. Although there is no single solution to achieving this, the following structure works well:

1. The first paragraph should make the case for the biological importance of the subject studied. For example, you might make the case that predator-prey interaction are fundamental to the biology of a broad diversity of animals. However, the first paragraph should also make clear that, despite this importance, there are critical areas that we do not understand. For example, we may not understand how prey fish are capable of sensing fish predators. Although you want to aim to boost the importance of your study at the outset, you also do not want to raise expectations that you will fail to meet, so alluding to the particular system that you are interested in (e.g., fish) and what areas are of interest (e.g., sensing) offer a specific sense for the reader of where you are headed.
2. The next few paragraphs need to offer all necessary background to justify the particular focus you have adopted for the present study. Think of each paragraph as offering a single argument for your justification. That argument is most often provided in the last sentence of each paragraph while the topic sentence opens the paragraph with a general statement on the subject.
3. The introduction should end with a paragraph that explains the major aims and/or questions addressed by the present study and the general design/approach of the study.

# The Methods

# The Results

# The Discussion